Adding Specification for the Adaptive Profile (#35)
qir-alliance/qir-spec: specification/under_development/profiles/Adaptive_Profile.md

   instruction `br` must be supported, along with the necessary runtime function
   to convert a measurement to an `i1` value and the LLVM instructions for
   computations on `i1` values defined in detail below.
4. It must produce one of the specified [output schemas](../output_schemas/).

This means that at minimum, backends supporting Adaptive Profile programs should
support mid-circuit measurement, turning measurements into booleans, and
branching based on those booleans. The QIR Adaptive Profile in particular also
requires that branches can be arbitrarily nested. This includes a requirement
that it must be possible to perform a measurement within a branch, and then
branch again on that measurement. As for the Base Profile, any Adaptive Profile
is always garanteed to terminate, i.e. there are not control flow loops
permitted that would lead to a potentially indefinitvely running program.

Beyond the providing the required capabilities above, a backend can opt into one
or more of the following [optional capabilities](#optional-capabilities) to
support more advanced adaptive computations:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD029 -->

> 5. Computations on classical (non-composite) data types, specifically on

Reviewer: This point mentions fixed-point numbers, which should not be included.

instructions](#classical-instructions).

Which data types are used in classical computations as part of an extended
Adaptive Profile must be indicated in the form of [module
flags](#module-flags-metadata). The module flag(s) specifically also include
information about the bitwith(s) of the used data type(s). It is the
responsiblity of the backend to provide a compile-time error message if any of
the used data types or widths thereof are not supported.

If the program makes use of classical computations on a specific data type, it
implies that variables of that data type may exist at any point in the program.
Specifically, it is then also permitted to pass such variables as arguments to
QIS functions, runtime functions, or [IR
functions](#bullet-6-ir-defined-functions-and-function-calls) (if available), as
illustrated in the [examples](#examples) section. Passing constant values of any
data type as arguments to QIS and runtime functions is always permitted,
regardless of whether classical computations on that data type are supported.

<!-- FIXME:
Allow to define and use global constants for (only) the supported data types.
-->

> ### Bullet 6: IR-defined functions and function calls

Reviewer 2: Revised such that arguments can be qubits results, **or any of the (optionally) supported classical data types**.

  ret void
}

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__z__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, %Result*)

declare i1 @__quantum__qis__read_result__body(%Result*)

; attributes

attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "qir_profiles"="adaptive_profile" "output_labeling_schema"="schema_id" "required_num_qubits"="6" "required_num_results"="6" }

; module flags

!llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1, !2, !3, !4, !5, !6, !7, !8, !9, !10}

!0 = !{i32 1, !"qir_major_version", i32 1}
!1 = !{i32 7, !"qir_minor_version", i32 0}
!2 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_qubit_management", i1 false}
!3 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_result_management", i1 false}
!4 = !{i32 5, !"int_computations", !""}
!5 = !{i32 5, !"float_computations", !""}

> !6 = !{i32 5, !"fixedpoint_computations", !""}

Reviewer: This sample contains a the `fixedpoint_computations` module flag which is no longer part of the spec.

| `phi`            | assign a value to a register based on control-flow                    |                                                                                            |

If an Adaptive Profile program has support for floating point computations on
floating-point numbers, then the following instructions are supported:

| LLVM Instruction | Context and Purpose               | Note                        |
| :--------------- | :-------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `fadd`           | Used to add two floats together.  |                             |
| `fsub`           | Used to subtract floats integers. |                             |
| `fmul`           | Used to multiply floats           |                             |
| `fdiv`           | Used for floating point division. | Can cause real-time errors. |
| `fptrunc`           | Floating point truncation from an fN to an fM where N>M |  |
| `fpext`           | Floating point extenstion from an fM to an fN where N>M |  |
|                  |                                   |                             |

## Runtime Functions

> The following runtime functions must be supported by all backends:

Reviewer: This table is missing the `__quantum__rt__bool_record_output` function.

kinds of pointers for representing a qubit or result value, as explained in more
detail [here](../Execution.md), and either one, though not both, may be used
throughout a bitcode file. A [module flag](#module-flags-metadata) in the
bitcode indicates which kinds of pointers are used to represent qubits and
result values.

The first kind of pointer points to a valid memory location that is managed
dynamically during program execution, meaning the necessary memory is allocated
and freed by the runtime. The second kind of pointer merely identifies a qubit
or result value by a constant integer encoded in the pointer itself. To be
compliant with the Adaptive Profile specification, the program must not make use
of dynamic qubit or result management, meaning it must use only the second kind
of pointer; qubits and results must be identified by a constant integer value
that is bitcast to a pointer to match the expected type. How such an integer
value is interpreted and specifically how it relates to hardware resources is
ultimately up to the executing backend.

Additionally, the Adaptive Profile imposes the following restrictions on qubit
and result usage:

> - Qubits must not be used after they have been passed as arguments to a function

Reviewer: This seems inconsistent with the rest of the specification. Up to this point, qubit reuse is a required capability, but this point conveys the message that qubit reuse is not supported in an adaptive profile program.

they can occur only in one place.

Within the restrictions imposed by the Adaptive Profile, the number of qubits
that are needed to execute the quantum program must be known at compile time.
This number is captured in the form of the `"required_num_qubits"` attribute
attached to the entry point. The value of the attribute must be the string
representation of a non-negative 64-bit integer constant.

Similarly, the number of measurement results that need to be stored when
executing the entry point function is captured by the `"required_num_results"`
attribute.

Beyond the entry point-specific requirements related to attributes, custom
attributes may optionally be attached to any of the declared functions. The
`irreversible` attribute in particular impacts how the program logic in the
entry point is structured, as described in the section about the [entry point
definition](#entry-point-definition). Furthermore, the following [LLVM
attributes](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes) may be used
according to their intended purpose on function declarations and call sites:
`inlinehint`, `nofree`, `norecurse`, `readnone`, `readonly`, `writeonly`, and

> `argmemonly`.

Reviewer: Is there a reason to highlight this specific set of LLVM attributes. I would think that if someone includes certain attributes LLVM attributes in their QIR program, consumers of that program can use some of them as hints for processing it but it would be up to them which specific attributes will have special handling.

Reviewer 2: These seemed useful to convey information to LLVM that will enable existing optimizations. At the same time, a new/custom compiler pass should generally accurately deal with attributes, so we didn't want to give a blanket check for using any of the LLVM attributes when we defined this for the base profile. New compiler passes should respect these ones. Generally, using attributes that are not listed here usually won't result in issues, but they may not be treated/propagated properly by QIR passes.

the QIR bitcode to indicate support/use of optional capabilities. A lack of
these module flags indicates that these capabilities are not used in the
program.

- a flag with the string identifier `"int_computations"` that contains a string
  value where the string value is a comma-separated list of the supported/used
  integer precision(s). For example, `!0 = !{i32 5, !"int_computations",
  !"i32,i64"}`. Classical computations on integers of all listed precisions must
  be supported by the executing backend. An empty value indicates that no
  integer computations are supported/used.
- a flag with the string identifier `"float_computations"` that contains a
  string value where the string value is a comma-separated list of the
  supported/used floating-point precision(s). For example, `!0 = !{i32 5,
  !"float_computations", !"f32,f64"}`. The precision must be one of the LLVM
  recognized values (f16, f32, f64, f80, or f128), and classical computations on
  floating point numbers of all listed precisions must be supported by the
  executing backend. An empty value indicates that no floating-point
  computations are supported/used.

> - a flag with the string identifier `"fixedpoint_computations"` that contains a

Reviewer: This point should be removed since fixed point computations are no longer part of the adaptive profile spec.

  string value where the string value is a comma-separated list of the
  supported/used fixed-point precision(s). For example, `!0 = !{i32 5,
  !"fixedpoint_computations", !"i4,i8"}`. The value of this module flag may only
  be non-empty if integer computations are supported. To support fixed-point
  arithmetic for a precision `N`, a backend must be able to perform integer
  computations with precision `2N`, and it must be able to process constant
  integer values of type `i32` being passed as scale. See also the [LLVM
  Language

>   Reference](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#fixed-point-arithmetic-intrinsics).

Reviewer: This point should also be removed since it references fixed point computations.

# Adaptive Profile

This profile defines a subset of the QIR specification to support a coherent set
of functionalities and capabilities that might be offered by a quantum backend.
Like all profile specifications, this document is primarily intended for
[compiler backend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Back_end) authors as
well as contributors to the [targeting
stage](../Compilation_And_Targeting.md#targeting) of the QIR compiler.

The adaptive profile specifies supersets of the base profile that enable
control flow based on mid-circuit measurements and classical computations
within coherence times. A backend can support this profile by supporting
a minimum set of features beyond the base profile and can opt in for features
beyond that. This marks the first attempt at defining a profile greater in scope
than the base profile but still limited when compared to the full QIR specification.

Being a superset of the base profile means that these 3 *capabilities* must be

> implemented (a few restrictions are removed from the base profile):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implemented:
```

1. An adaptive profile program can execute a sequence of quantum instructions
   that transform the quantum state.

> 2. An adaptive profile program can measure any qubit used in the program and

Reviewer 2: I find this confusing as phrased. The phrasing makes the difference to the base profile not very clear. 
Suggested phrasing: "A backend must support applying measurement instructions at any point during execution without impacting the state of the qubits that are not measured. Specifically, `quantum__qis__mz__body` or some other measurement function must be supported in the quantum instruction set."

   thus a backend must be able to measure the state of all qubits for use in
   program output generation.

> 3. An adaptive profile program must produce one of the specified [output schemas](../output_schemas/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The exact sequence of instructions applied when executing an adaptive profile program may depend on measurement outcomes. Specifically, this means that forward branching, meaning a conditional jump to a new block of instructions (expressed as `br` instruction), must be supported. Furthermore, a conversion to turn a measurement result into a boolean value (`__quantum__rt__read_result__body`) must be supported, and it must be possible to perform basic classical logic on boolean values.
4. An adaptive profile program must produce one of the specified [output schemas](../output_schemas/).
```

Reviewer 2: Edit: The basic classical logic that need to be supported on boolean values needs to be listed explicitly somewhere.

> Minimum capability additions to the base profile an adaptive profile supporting

Reviewer 2: I find the split into 1-3 and then 4-7 confusing. I hence suggested updated to make it a single list with 4 bullets grouping that roughly reads:
You need to be able to 
- perform sequence of instructions
- perform a measurement at any time during execution
- adjust which subsequent instructions are applied depending on a measurement
- produce output.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this sentence read the following?

> Minimum capability additions to the base profile **that** an adaptive profile supporting backend must be able to support are:

reflect the program intent. This includes being able to define and customize the
program output. The base profile and adaptive profile specifications hence
require explicitly expressing which values/measurements are returned by the
program and in which order. How to express this is defined in the section on
[output recording](#output-recording).

A suitable output schema can be generated in a post-processing step after the
computation on the quantum processor itself has finished; customization of the
program output hence does not require support on the QPU itself.

The defined [output schemas](../output_schemas/) provide different options for
how a backend may express the computed value(s). The exact schema can be freely
chosen by the backend and is identified by a string label in the produced
schema. Each output schema contains sufficient information to allow quantum
programming frameworks to generate a user-friendly presentation of the returned
values in the requested order, such as, e.g., a histogram of all results when
running the program multiple times.

### Bullet 4: Conditional Forward branching

The adaptive profile can allow for arbitrary forward branching with the

> restriction being that branch instructions cannot express programs that do not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
restriction being that branch instructions must not express programs that do not
```

terminate. By default, support for backwards branching is not a requirement,
though a backend can opt into **Bullet 11** to support backwards branching.
In the case that **Bullet 11** is not opted into, then a simple static analysis
can check for cycles in the control flow graph and reject any program with a
cycle as invalid. Depending on the vector of capabilities defined by an adaptive
profile program (like when **Bullet 11** is opted into), proving non-termination
with a static analysis may be impossible due to the capabilities forming a
Turing-complete subset of LLVM. Therefore, it is a rule that a *valid* adaptive

> profile program should not contain non-terminating loops and that a frontend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
profile program should not contain non-terminating loops, even if backward branching is supported, and that a frontend
```

generating a program with a non-terminating loop is generating a program that is
not compliant with the adaptive profile specification. However, since there is
no static analysis that can prove termination then it is up to backends to enforce
termination guarantees via a means of their choosing (for example a watchdog process
with a timeout that will kill an executing adaptive profile program if it takes
too much time). Different forms of conditional logic can be supported in the
profile based on optional features, but at minimum, the simple `br` branch
instruction must be supported.

### Bullet 5: Mid-circuit measurement

The adaptive profile allows for mid-circuit measurement to be expressed in
programs by removing restrictions on a measurement operation (we will use
measurement in Z represented by `llvm __quantum__qis__mz__body` in this

> document, but other forms of measurement can also apply) that state that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
document, but other forms of measurement can be substituted) that state that
```
Note that there is a finer decision point here regarding whether a backend that only supports joint measurements is profile compliant. I.e. imo the adaptive spec adds capability requirements for how *whatever* measurements that are supported by a backend can be used, but doesn't require *specific* measurements to be possible. I advocate for this being the case. Hence, my phrasings above carefully avoid stating that it must be possible to measure any *single* qubit, and updated the phrasing here to reflect the fact that we use mz as a placeholder for whatever measurements the backend supports.

conditionally perform gates as part of things like repeat-until-success or
quantum-error-correction routines in quantum programs.

Here is an example program that mixes mid-circuit measurement (**Bullet 5**), a
`qis` function to convert a measurement result to a boolean (**Bullet 7**), and
a branch instruction (**Bullet 4**) to control how gates are applied based on
mid-circuit measurement.

```llvm
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* null)
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* null)
  %0 = tail call i1 @__quantum__rt__read_result__body(%Result* null)
  br i1 %0, label %then, label %continue
then:                                   ; preds = %entry
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
  br label %continue__1.i.i.i

continue:
...
```

### Bullet 7: Measurement Results to Booleans

A function to turn measurement results into classical data, mid-circuit, is
critical to using forward branching and conditional quantum execution.

```llvm
%0 = tail call i1 @__quantum__rt__read_result__body(%Result* null)

>   br i1 %0, label %then, label %continue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 br i1 %0, label %then, label %continue
```

```

## Optional Capabilities

### Bullet 8: Qubit resetting

If a backend opts into supporting this feature, then we can allow
for an instruction to reset qubits back to the |0> state to be defined
in the instruction set. This can be illustrated by the following program:

```llvm
call quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null) ; arbitrary gate here
...
call quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* null)
call quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*)) ; arbitrary gate choice again
...
```

> This can be combined with the mid-circuit measurement (**Bullet 5**) to allow

Reviewer 2: I don't get the argument that reset is necessary to allow for qubit reuse. Reset is just an optimized implementation of
```
call quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* null)
%0 = tail call i1 @__quantum__rt__read_result__body(%Result* null)
br i1 %0, label %then, label %continue
then:  
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit* null)
  br label %continue
continue:
...
```

| `icmp`           | Performs signed or unsigned integer comparisons.                      | Different options are: `eq`, `ne`, `slt`, `sgt`, `sle`, `sge`, `ult`, `ugt`, `ule`, `uge`. |
| `zext`           | zero extend an iM to an iN where N>M                                  |                                                                                            |
| `sext`           | signed zero extend an iM to an iN where N>M                           |                                                                                            |
| `select`         | conditionally select the value in a register based on a boolean value |                                                                                            |
| `phi`            | assign a value to a register based on control-flow                    |                                                                                            |

Consider the following code snippet to illustrate phi instruction support for integers:

```llvm
define void @purelyclassical() local_unnamed_addr #0 {
entry:
  %0 = add i64 1, 2 ; 3
  %1 = icmp eq i64 %0, 3

>   br i1 %6, label %then, label %else

Reviewer 3: I think `%6` should be changed to `%1`

then:
  %2 = add i64 %0, 1
  br label %else
else:
  %8 = phi i64 [ 0, %entry ],  [ %2, %then ]
  ret void
}
```

If an adaptive profile program has support for floating point computations (the
`classical_floats` module flag is set to `true`), then the following instructions
are supported.

| LLVM Instruction | Context and Purpose               | Note                        |
| :--------------- | :-------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `fadd`           | Used to add two floats together.  |                             |
| `fsub`           | Used to subtract floats integers. |                             |
| `fmul`           | Used to multiply floats           |                             |
| `fdiv`           | Used for floating point division. | Can cause real-time errors. |

> |                  |                                   |                             |

Reviewer 2: select and phi are missing here - they need to be added.

module flag is set to `true`), can use the following intrinsics:

| LLVM Intrinsic       | Context and Purpose                                  | Note                        |
| :------------------- | :--------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------- |
| `llvm.smul.fix.*`    | Used to multiply two signed fixed point numbers.     |                             |
| `llvm.smul.fix.sat*` | Same as above but clamps to min/max number in scale. |                             |
| `llvm.umul.fix.*`    | Used to multiply two unsigned fixed point numbers.   |                             |
| `llvm.umul.fix.sat*` | Same as above but clamps to min/max number in scale. |                             |
| `llvm.sdiv.fix.*`    | Used to divide two signed fixed point numbers.       | Can cause real-time errors. |
| `llvm.sdiv.fix.sat*` | Same as above but clamps to min/max number in scale. |                             |
| `llvm.udiv.fix.*`    | Used to divide two unsigned fixed point numbers.     | Can cause real-time errors. |
| `llvm.udiv.fix.sat*` | Same as above but clamps to min/max number in scale. |                             |

> |                      |                                                      |                             |

Reviewer 2: select and phi are missing here - they need to be added.

### Bullet 10: User-defined functions and function calls

> An adaptive profile program may use user-defined functions and function calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An adaptive profile program may use IR defined functions and function calls.
```

For example, consider that with user-defined functions if a backend has a `Cnot`
gate in its instruction set, then a program that liberally uses `Swap` operations
can define a function and call it as follows:

```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}

define void @main() {
...

> call void @swap_0_1(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (1 to %Qubit*))

Reviewer 3: I think `swap_0_1 ` should be changed to simply `swap`

...
}
```

Moreover, classical functions can be defined in the IR assuming that a backend
has opted into supporting classical computations:

```llvm
define i64 @triple(i64 %0) {
%1 = mul i64 %0, 3
ret i64 %1
}

define void @main() {
...
%0 = call void @triple(i64 2)
...
}
```

> The only restriction on user functions and definitions is that you cannot have

Reviewer 2: I find this paragraph confusing. There are plenty of restrictions, such as e.g. what LLVM instructions can be used. Qubits are not special here - any restrictions that the profile imposes apply to any function. How about replacing this paragraph (except for the last sentence) with the sentence "All restrictions with respect to usage of data types and LLVM instructions defined by this profile also apply to user defined functions. In particular, the signatures of user-defined functions may only contain supported data types."

dynamically allocated `%Qubit*`  arguments, they must still be constant `%Qubit*`
id's. An adaptive profile program using this feature must have a module flag

> set like the following: `!{i32 1, !"user_functions", i1 true}`.

Reviewer 2: rename user_function to ir_defined_function

with a qubit and exits the program when the coin flip produces a 1. It is up to
a backend to enforce that a program using backwards branching does not cause
non-termination.

```llvm
...
define void @simple_loop() local_unnamed_addr #0 {
entry:
  br label %loop
loop:
  call void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null)
  call void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* null)
  %0 = call i1 @__quantum__rt__read_result__body(%Result* null)
  br i1 %0, label %exit, label %loop
exit:
  ret void
}
...
```

An adaptive profile program using this feature must
have a module flag set like the following: `!{i32 1, !"backwards_branching", i1 true}`.

### Bullet 12: Multiple Target Branching

It can be desirable to support control constructs that indicate how a computation
can lead to branching to one of *many* different control flow paths. Having such
a construct exposed in the IR allows for more aggressive optimization considerations
where it is easy to gather that gates being performed on the same qubits across
different blocks can have no control flow dependencies. As such, a backend can
opt into switch instruction support so that more aggressive static analysis and

> optimization are possible. To make such a construct useful, some amount of integer

Reviewer 2: some amount? What integer computation exactly needs to be supported?

Debug symbols contain information that is used by a debugger to relate failures
during execution back to the original source code. While we expect this to be
primarily useful for execution on simulators, debug symbols are both easy to
ignore and may be useful to generate helpful error messages for compilation
failures that happen only late in the process. We hence see no reason to
disallow them from occurring in the bitcode but will not detail their use any
further. We defer to existing resources for more information about how to
generate and use debug symbols.

## Entry Point Definition

The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that should be invoked
when the program is executed, referred to as "entry point" in the rest of this
profile specification. The name of this function may be chosen freely, as long
as it is a valid [global
identifier](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#identifiers) according to the
LLVM standard. The entry point is identified by a custom function attribute; the
section on [attributes](#attributes) defines which attributes must be attached
to the entry point function.

> An entry point function may not take any parameters and must either return void

Reviewer 2: I think we should always require returning an integer. The Base Profile requires returning an integer even though there are no error conditions. 
```suggestion
An entry point function may not take any parameters and must either return void
```

in case the program has no failure conditions or must return an exit code in the
form of a 64-bit integer. In the case that a shot fails either because the entry
point function returns an integer value indicating that the program caught an

> error or because an instruction caused an uncaught error (for example a `div`

Reviewer 2: What does it mean to have an uncaught error? How would an uncaught error be detected?
For the Adaptive Profile, the responsibility needs to be with the frontend that generates the profile to ensure a non-zero exit code is produced when a division by zero happens. We have no requirement for backends to have any form of program error detection or handling.

instruction fails due to division by 0), then the output format should indicate
that the shot failed with output for the shot appearing as `ERROR Code: ival`
where `ival` is the error code from the adaptive profile program or `ERROR message`
in the case that an uncaught failure occurs, and the message is chosen by the backend.

The adaptive profile program makes no restrictions on the structure of basic

> blocks within the entry point function, other than that a block cannot jump to a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
blocks within the entry point function, other than that a block must not jump to a
```

previously encountered block in the control flow graph unless a backend opts
into **Bullet 11**. By default adaptive profile programs limit branching to only
express forward branching and nested conditionality. Additionally, the only
functions that can be called by default in the entry block are `qis` or `rt`
functions defined in the instruction set and profile. This restriction is removed

> if a backend opts into **Bullet 10** which allows for user-defined functions.

Reviewer 3: [This example](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/blob/93597a337816e260628eb4d53b8510427251d4a9/specification/under_development/profiles/Adaptive_Profile.md?plain=1#L324-L327) from Bullet 9 makes me assume that classical instructions are also allowed. If so, I would suggest to change the last sentence of this paragraph to something like this:

> This restriction is removed if a backend opts into Bullet 9 or 10 which allow for classical instructions and user-defined functions, respectively.

in the introduction of this document. For more information about how and when
the QIS is resolved, as well as recommendations for front- and backend
developers, we refer to the document on [compilation stages and
targeting](../Compilation_And_Targeting.md).

## Classical Instructions

The following instructions are the LLVM instructions that were permitted
within a base profile-compliant program:

| LLVM Instruction         | Context and Purpose                                                                               | Rules for Usage                                                                                             |
| :----------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `call`                   | Used within a basic block to invoke any one of the declared QIS functions and run-time functions. | May optionally be preceded by a [`tail` marker](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#call-instruction).       |

> | `br`                     | Used to branch from one block to another in the entry point function.                             | The branching must be unconditional and occurs as the final instruction of a block to jump to the next one. |

Reviewer 2: maybe we should just list the classical computations on i1 that we require even without optional capabilities here

| __quantum__rt__array_record_output  | `void(i64,i8*)`      | Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of an array and how many array elements it has. The second parameter defines a string label for the array. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted. |
| __quantum__rt__result_record_output | `void(%Result*,i8*)` | Adds a measurement result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.                                                         |
| __quantum__rt__bool_record_output   | `void(i1,i8*)`       | Adds a boolean value to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.                                                              |

> The following output recording functions can appear if you opt into supporting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following output recording functions can appear if the program uses and thus requires support for
```

real-time integer calculations (the backend supports the `classical_ints` module

> flag). If you opt into a less standard width than any of the options below, then

Reviewer 2: Who is "you"? If the backend supports a non-standard width?
```suggestion
flag). If the program leverages support for integers with non-standard width (i.e. other than any of the options below), then
```

`i64` value as an argument to the call, even if this extension is not actually
performed on the hardware and is just a means to make the program well-typed:

| Function                         | Signature       | Description                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| :------------------------------- | :-------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| __quantum__rt__int_record_output | `void(i64,i8*)` | Adds an integer result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.        |
| __quantum__rt__i32_record_output | `void(i32,i8*)` | Adds an 32-bit integer result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted. |

> The following output recording functions can appear if you opt into supporting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following output recording functions can appear if the program leverages support for non-standard width 
```

> The following output recording functions can appear if you opt into supporting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following output recording functions can appear if the program makes use of
```

real-time floating point or fixed floating point calculations (the backend
supports the `classical_floats` and `classical_fixed_points` module flags). If

> you opt into a less standard width than any of the options below, then it is up

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the program leverages support for non-standard width data types, then it is up
```

| __quantum__rt__f32_record_output    | `void(f32,i8*)` | Adds an 32-bit floating point value result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.          |

Additionally, a backend can provide more `rt` functions that can be used by
adaptive profile programs in accordance with the classical data types that it supports.

### Initialization

*A [workstream](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec/issues/11) to specify
how to initialize the execution environment is currently in progress. As part of
that workstream, this paragraph and the listed initialization function(s) will
be updated.*

### Output Recording

The program output of a quantum application is defined by a sequence of calls to
run-time functions that record the values produced by the computation,
specifically calls to the run-time functions ending in `record_output` listed in
the tables [above](#run-time-functions). In the case of the adaptive profile, these

> calls are contained within the final block of the entry point function, i.e. the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
calls are contained within the last executed block, i.e. the
```

[Compiler frontends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler#Front_end) must
always generate these labels in such a way that the bitcode does not depend on
the output schema; while choosing how to best label the program output is up to
the frontend, the choice of output schema, on the other hand, is up to the
backend. A backend may reject a program as invalid or fail execution if a label
is missing.

Both the labeling schema and the output schema are identified by a metadata
entry in the produced output. For the [output schema](../output_schemas/), that
identifier matches the one listed in the corresponding specification. The
identifier for the labeling schema, on the other hand, is defined by the value
of the `"output_labeling_schema"` attribute attached to the entry point.

## Data Types and Values

Within the adaptive profile, defining local variables is supported via
reading mid-circuit measurements via (**Bullets 5/7**) or by classical instructions
and calls (**Bullets 9**) if a backend supports
these features. This implies the
following:

- Call arguments can be constant values, `inttoptr` casts,
  `getelementptr` instructions that are inlined into a call instruction, or

>   classical registers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  LLVM constants of any type.
```

> - backends can have various numeric data types used in their instructions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Non-constant values of integer type, floating point type, or fixed point type can be passed as arguments if the targeted profile includes the optional support for that data type.
```

In general, the QIR specification distinguishes between two kinds of pointers
for representing a qubit or result value, as explained in more detail
[here](../Execution.md), and either one, though not both, may be used
throughout a bitcode file. A [module flag](#module-flags-metadata) in the
bitcode indicates which kinds of pointers are used to represent qubits and
result values.

The first kind of pointer points to a valid memory location that is managed
dynamically during program execution, meaning the necessary memory is allocated
and freed by the run-time. The second kind of pointer merely identifies a qubit
or result value by a constant integer encoded in the pointer itself. To be
compliant with the adaptive profile specification, the program must not make use
of dynamic qubit or result management, meaning it must use only the second kind of
pointer; qubits and results must be identified by a constant integer value that
is bitcast to a pointer to match the expected type. How such an integer value is
interpreted and specifically how it relates to hardware resources is ultimately
up to the executing backend.

> Additionally, the adaptive profile imposes the following restrictions on qubit and

Reviewer 2: The first restriction here certainly needs to be removed. The second restriction is less clear - while it could stay as is, I think it may make sense to remove it as well. That would mean that results could be assigned to variables though. I'd want some of the hardware providers to weigh in regarding if there is a reason not to allow that.

usage](#qubit-and-result-usage), an adaptive profile-compliant program must not make
use of dynamic qubit or result management. The value of both module flags hence
must be set to `false`.

For `i1`, `i64`, `f64`, ... values created by mid-circuit measurement, extern
functions, or classical computations the assumption is that while a `%Result*`
may point to a valid memory location in RAM or some other memory pool, by default,
instructions performed on virtual registers with these data types correspond to
these values being stored in integer or floating registers when an instruction is
executed. Before a virtual register is used in an instruction, there is no
assumption that the value in the virtual register always corresponds to a physical
register. For example, when considering register coloring, the virtual register,
`%0`, in the QIR program may refer to a value stored in RAM for most of its
lifetime before being loaded into a register when an instruction operates on `%0`.
backends should specify any constraints on classical compute support on this
[page](./Adaptive_Hardware/providers.md#backend-support-for-adaptive-profile).

> ### Error Messages

Reviewer 2: I think this section would fit better into a subsection under ## Entry Point Definition
```suggestion
### Error Codes
```

the QIS, recommendations for front- and backend providers, as well as the
distinction between run-time functions and quantum instructions, can be found in
this [document](../Instruction_Set.md).

### Bullet 2: Measurements

The second requirement relieves a restriction from the base profile that qubits
can only be measured at the end of the program and that no quantum operations
can be performed on a measured qubit.
The only requirement here is that all qubits must be measurable, but
there are no restrictions on when these measurements are made, and there is
no restriction necessitating that all qubits be measured. I.E. it's perfectly
valid to measure a subset of qubits used in the program, not have all measured
qubits in the output, and perform the measurements at different points.
A function to turn measurement results into classical data, mid-circuit, is
critical to using forward branching and conditional quantum execution.
An example of such a function (`@_quantum__rt__read_result__body`) is below:

```llvm
%0 = tail call i1 @__quantum__rt__read_result__body(%Result* null)
 br i1 %0, label %then, label %continue
```

### Bullet 3: Program output

> There is no change to output specifications with respect to the base profile, sans for the 

Reviewer 4: Error codes are no longer present in the spec. Non-zero return values indicate an error has occurred, but are all provider/backend specific.

addition of error codes.

The specifications of QIR and all its profiles need to accurately
reflect the program intent. This includes being able to define and customize the
program output. The base profile and adaptive profile specifications hence
require explicitly expressing which values/measurements are returned by the
program and in which order. How to express this is defined in the section on
[output recording](#output-recording).

A suitable output schema can be generated in a post-processing step after the
computation on the quantum processor itself has finished; customization of the
program output hence does not require support on the QPU itself.

The defined [output schemas](../output_schemas/) provide different options for

> how a backend may express the computed value(s). The exact schema can be freely

Reviewer 4: We need the output schemas PR merged as this just points to empty files.

  %2 = and i1 %0, %1
  br i1 %2, label %then, label %continue

then:                                   ; preds = %entry
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 2 to %Qubit*))
  br label %continue__1.i.i.i

continue:
...
```

An adaptive profile program must indicate which classical data types must be supported to execute it. This is done by
setting the following module flags to indicate the widths of various classical types as values for the rightmost
section of the module flag metadata, like in the table below. Any program like the
previous one that uses instructions on classical data types must have the
appropriate module flag set, or it is not a legal adaptive profile program. A module flag can indicate that the
program uses multiple classical types by adding multiple "end" fields in the module flags, each an i32 representing
a type's width. For example, `!{i32 1, !"classical_ints", i32 16, i32 32}` indicates that both 16-bit integers
and 32-bit integers are used in the adaptive profile program. On the other hand, `!{i32 1, !"classical_ints", i32 0}` indicates

> that the program does not use classical integer computations.

Reviewer 4: If an extension to the core spec isn't supported, I think omitting the flag makes more sense than having to interpret the value as a special case.

  ret void
}

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__z__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, %Result*)

declare i1 @__quantum__qis__read_result__body(%Result*)

; attributes

attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "qir_profiles"="adaptive_profile" "output_labeling_schema"="schema_id" "required_num_qubits"="6" "required_num_results"="6" }

; module flags

!llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1, !2, !3, !4, !5, !6, !7, !8, !9, !10}

!0 = !{i32 1, !"qir_major_version", i32 1}
!1 = !{i32 7, !"qir_minor_version", i32 0}
!2 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_qubit_management", i1 false}
!3 = !{i32 1, !"dynamic_result_management", i1 false}
!4 = !{i32 1, !"classical_ints", i32 0} ; ...
!5 = !{i32 1, !"classical_floats", i32 0}
!6 = !{i32 1, !"classical_fixed_points", i32 0}

> !7 = !{i32 1, !"IR_functions", i1 false}

Reviewer 4: We should fix the casing to be consistent with the other flags `ir_functions`

The adaptive profile program makes no restrictions on the structure of basic
blocks within the entry point function, other than that a block cannot jump to a
previously encountered block in the control flow graph unless a backend opts
into **Bullet 8**. By default adaptive profile programs limit branching to only
express forward branching and nested conditionality. Additionally, the only
functions that can be called by default in the entry block are `qis` or `rt`
functions defined in the instruction set and profile. This restriction is removed
if a backend opts into **Bullet 6** which allows for IR-defined functions.

## Quantum Instruction Set

For a quantum instruction set to be fully compatible with the adaptive profile, it
must satisfy the following three requirements:

- All functions must return `void`, `iN`, or `fN` types (`i1` and `i64` for example)
  and can only take in `%Qubit*`, `%Result*`, `iN`, or `fN` types as arguments.
  Additionally, arguments to the quantum instruction set cannot have dynamically
  computed arguments by default. They can however refer to static global values
  that are defined by linking (for example

>   `call @__quantum__qis__rz__body(double @angle, %Qubit* null)` where `@double`

Reviewer 4: `@angle`

| __quantum__rt__tuple_record_output  | `void(i64,i8*)`      | Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of a tuple and how many tuple elements it has. The second parameter defines a string label for the tuple. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.  |
| __quantum__rt__array_record_output  | `void(i64,i8*)`      | Inserts a marker in the generated output that indicates the start of an array and how many array elements it has. The second parameter defines a string label for the array. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted. |
| __quantum__rt__result_record_output | `void(%Result*,i8*)` | Adds a measurement result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.                                                         |

> | __quantum__rt__bool_record_output   | `void(i1,i8*)`       | Adds a boolean value to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.                                                              |

Reviewer 4: Is this supposed to be replaced with recording an integer of width 1? If so, the int recording requires the int extension to be implemented. This would mean that in core adaptive, we can use bools but can't record them.

Reviewer: I agree that we should keep `__quantum__rt__bool_record_output` and not replace it with `__quantum__rt__i1_record_output`.

> 

Reviewer 4: We need to update the output recording formats to include any changes in recording varying bit widths for int, float, fixed.

The following output recording functions can appear if you opt into supporting

> real-time integer calculations on an integer or fixed-point `iN` type (the profile compliant program sets the following module flag `!{i32 1, !"classical_ints", i32 N}` or  `!{i32 1, !"classical_fixed_points", i32 N}`).

Reviewer 4: I think fixed point needs its own ouput recording function as we need a radix in order to interpret the integer value and we can't rely on tagging for interpetation.

| Function                         | Signature       | Description                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| :------------------------------- | :-------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| __quantum__rt__iN_record_output | `void(i64,i8*)` | Adds an integer result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.        |

The following output recording functions can appear if you opt into supporting

> real-time floating point computations on an `fN` type (the profile compliant program sets the following module flag `!{i32 1, !"classical_ints", f32 N}`).

Reviewer 4: This creates an unknown arbitrary set of recording calls to link against and provide. I think adding an i8 size param would simplify the runtime and tooling.

according to their intended purpose on function declarations and call sites:
`inlinehint`, `nofree`, `norecurse`, `readnone`, `readonly`, `writeonly`, and
`argmemonly`.

## Module Flags Metadata

The following [module
flags](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#module-flags-metadata) must be added
to the QIR bitcode:

- a flag with the string identifier `"qir_major_version"` that contains a
  constant value of type `i32`
- a flag with the string identifier `"qir_minor_version"` that contains a
  constant value of type `i32`
- a flag with the string identifier `"dynamic_qubit_management"` that contains a
  constant `true` or `false` value of type `i1`
- a flag with the string identifier `"dynamic_result_management"` that contains
  a constant `true` or `false` value of type `i1`
- A flag named `"qubit_resetting"` with a boolean i1 value indicating
if the program uses reset operations on qubits.
- A flag named `"classical_ints"`  with a boolean i1 value indicating
if the program uses classical computations on integers.
- A flag named `"classical_floats"`  with a boolean i1 value indicating
if the program uses classical computations on floating point values.

> - A flag named `"classical_fixed_points"`  with a boolean i1 value indicating

Reviewer 4: @peter-campora @qci-amos for specifying fixed points, I think we need a pair of ints, one for the overall bitwidth and another for scaling factor. Or, do we allow varying bit widths with only a single scaling factor for an entire program?

The adaptive profile specifies supersets of the base profile that enables
control flow based on mid-circuit measurements and classical computations
within coherence times. A back-end can support this profile by supporting
a minimum set of features beyond the base profile and can opt-in for
features beyond that.
This marks the first attempt at defining
a profile greater in scope than the base profile but still limited when
compared to the full QIR specification.

Being a superset of the base profile means that these 3 *capabilities* must be implemented (a few restrictions are removed from the base profile):

1. An adaptive profile program can execute a sequence of quantum instructions
   that transform the quantum state.
2. An adaptive profile program can measure any qubit used in the program and thus
   a back-end must be able to measure the state of all qubits for use in program output generation.
3. An adaptive profile program must produce one of the specified [output schemas](../output_schemas/).

Minimum capability additions to the base profile an adaptive profile supporting back-end must be able to support:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD029 -->

> 4. Conditional branching (the profile must support the `br` instruction assuming that the instruction only expresses non-loop control flow). Since support for the `br`

Reviewer: nit: since branching already implies a condition, maybe this could start with just "Branching".

The specification of QIR and all its profiles needs to accurately
reflect the program intent. This includes being able to define and customize the
program output. The base profile  and adaptive profile specifications hence require explicitly
expressing which values/measurements are returned by the program and in which
order. How to express this is defined in the section on [output
recording](#output-recording).

A suitable output schema can be
generated in a post-processing step after the computation on the quantum
processor itself has completed; customization of the program output hence does
not require support on the QPU itself.

The defined [output schemas](../output_schemas/) provide different options for
how a backend may express the computed value(s). The exact schema can be freely
chosen by the backend and is identified by a string label in the produced
schema. Each output schema contains sufficient information to allow quantum
programming frameworks to generate a user-friendly presentation of the returned
values in the requested order, such as, e.g., a histogram of all results when
running the program multiple times.

> ### Bullet 4: Conditional Forward branching

Reviewer: nit: Similar to another comment, since branching already implies a condition, maybe this can be just "Forward Branching".

Moreover, it's allowable that gates are conditionally performed based on the
control flow to various blocks based on ** Bullet 6**.
Depending on the vector of capabilities defined by an Adaptive Profile program, 
proving non-termination with a static analysis may impossible due to the capabilities
forming a Turing-complete subset of LLVM. Thus, it is up to back-ends to enforce 
termination guarantees via a means of their choosing (for example a watchdog process
with a timeout that will kill an executing Adaptive Profile program if it takes
too much time). The following forms of branch instructions can be supported in the 
profile, but at least the basic `br` instruction must be supported from the list below :
| LLVM Instruction         | Context and Purpose                                                                              | Rules for Usage                                                                                             |
| :----------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `br i1 label %true_branch, label %false_branch`                   | Branch to one of two target blocks. | Cannot be used to implement a non-terminating loop.     |

Reviewer 5: What does "cannot be used" mean? As noted above, this is unenforceable in the general case.

> | `br i1 label %true_branch, label %false_branch`                   | Branch to one of two target blocks. | Cannot be used to implement a non-terminating loop.     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `br i1 label %true_branch, label %false_branch`                   | Branch to one of two target blocks. | Must not be used to implement a non-terminating loop.     |
```

| `add`            | Used to add two integers together.                         |                                                                                            |
| `sub`            | Used to subtract two integers.                             |                                                                                            |
| `mul`            | Used to multiply integers                                  |                                                                                            |
| `udiv`           | Used for unsigned division.                                | Can cause real-time errors.                                                                |
| `sdiv`           | Used for signed division.                                  | Can cause real-time errors.                                                                |
| `urem`           | Used for unsigned remainder division.                      | Can cause real-time errors.                                                                |

> | `srem`           | Used for signed remainder division.                        | Can cause real-time errors.                                                                |

Reviewer 5: assuming the backend supports such real-time errors

```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}

define void @main() {
...
call void @swap_0_1()
...
}
```

Moreover, classical functions can be defined in the IR assuming that a back-end has opted into supporting
classical computations:

```llvm
define i64 @triple(i64 %0) {
%1 = mul i64 %0, 3
ret i64 %1
}

define void @main() {
...
%0 = call void @triple(i64 2)
...
}
```

The only restriction on user functions and definitions is that you cannot have dynamically allocated `%Qubit*`  arguments, they must still be constant `%Qubit*` id's. 

**Bullet 13: Dynamically computed or linked float angles for gates** <br />
If a back-end opts into this feature, non-constant floating point calculations can be used as arguments
to functions in the instruction set. Consider the following program illustrating this:
```llvm
  %0 = mul double 3.14, 2.0
  tail call void @__quantum__qis__rz__body(double %0, %Qubit* null)

> ```

Reviewer 5: it's worth considering if/how to support different units of the angles. specifically, the gates are typically defined in terms of radians, but some backends may require units of pi (e.g., fixed-point implementations) and in such contexts, it's not desirable to do unit conversion at run-time.

Maybe an attribute on the qir since all gates would be handled the same?

Reviewer 2: This comment should be properly covered in a specification of the instruction set rather than here.

| `llvm.sdiv.fix.sat*`| Same as above but clamps to min/max number in scale.  |                             |
| `llvm.udiv.fix.*`| Used to divide two unsigned fixed point numbers. | Can cause real-time errors. |
| `llvm.udiv.fix.sat*`| Same as above but clamps to min/max number in scale.  |                             |
|                  |                                   |                             |

Similarly to **Bullet 9**, the phi instruction can be used to move classical fixed point values between branches.

**Bullet 12: User defined functions and function calls** <br />
An adaptive profile program may use user defined functions and function calls.
For example, consider that with user defined functions if a back-end has a `Cnot` gate in its instruction set,
then a program that liberally uses `Swap` operations can define a function and call it as follows:
```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}

define void @main() {
...

> call void @swap_0_1()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
```

Reviewer: Small change to match with the user-defined function `swap`.

...
}
```

Moreover, classical functions can be defined in the IR assuming that a back-end has opted into supporting
classical computations:

```llvm
define i64 @triple(i64 %0) {
%1 = mul i64 %0, 3
ret i64 %1
}

define void @main() {
...
%0 = call void @triple(i64 2)
...
}
```

> The only restriction on user functions and definitions is that you cannot have dynamically allocated `%Qubit*`  arguments, they must still be constant `%Qubit*` id's. 

Reviewer: I think the phrasing here requires some context due to the mention of dynamic qubit allocation. An alternative way of phrasing it with more details would be something like this:

There are three restrictions on user-defined functions if they operate on qubits:
1. If a user-defined function calls a quantum instruction set (QIS) function (e.g. a function with `__quantum__qis` prefix), the `Qubit%*` arguments to the QIS function must come from a `%Qubit*` arguments of the user-defined function itself.

**Valid example**:
```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}
define void @main() {
...
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
...
}
```

**Invalid example**:
```llvm
define void @swap() {
    ; This is invalid because __quantum_qis* functions are being called from within a user-defined function and the provided `%Qubit*` arguments are constant.
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*), %Qubit* null)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
}
define void @main() {
...
    call void @swap()
...
}
```

2. If called from the entry-point function, they must receive constant `%Qubit*` IDs as arguments.

**Valid example**:
```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}
; Assuming main is the entry-point function.
define void @main() {
...
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
...
}
```

**Invalid example**:
```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}
; Assuming main is the entry-point function.
define void @main() {
...
    ; This is invalid because the `%Qubit*` arguments used when calling the user-defined function are not constants.
    %0 = __quantum__rt__qubit_allocate()
    %1 = __quantum__rt__qubit_allocate()
    call void @swap(%Qubit* %1, %Qubit* %2)
...
}
```

3. If called from within another user-defined function, the `%Qubit*%` arguments it receives can only be arguments from the caller function.

 **Valid example**:
```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}

define void @swap_and_h(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    call void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
    call void __quantum__qis__h(%Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__h(%Qubit* %arg2)
}
; Assuming main is the entry-point function.
define void @main() {
...
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
...
}
```

**Invalid example**:
```llvm
define void @swap(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg2, %Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2)
}

define void @swap_and_h(%Qubit* %arg1, %Qubit* %arg2) {
    ; Invalid because it calls a user-defined function from another user-defined function using constants and dynamically allocated qubits as arguments.
    %1 = __quantum__rt__qubit_allocate()
    call void @swap(%Qubit*  null, %Qubit* %1)
    call void __quantum__qis__h(%Qubit* %arg1)
    call void __quantum__qis__h(%Qubit* %arg2)
}
; Assuming main is the entry-point function.
define void @main() {
...
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
    call void @swap(%Qubit* null, %Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 1 to %Qubit*))
...
}
```

> **Bullet 13: Dynamically computed or linked float angles for gates** <br />

Reviewer: Based on our conversation, this option could be called "Non-static float angles for gates" or something similar.

The following output recording functions can appear if you opt into supporting real-time integer or fixed point integer calculations. If you opt into a less standard width than any of the options below, then it is up to the program to use a `zext` or `sext` instruction to get an `i32` or `i64` value as an argument to the call, even if this extension is not actually performed on the hardware and is just a means to make the program well-typed:

| Function                            | Signature       | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|:------------------------------------|:----------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | __quantum__rt__int_record_output    | `void(i64,i8*)` | Adds an integer result to the generated output. The second parameter defines a string label for the result value. Depending on the output schema, the label is included in the output or omitted.                              |

Reviewer: I think associating output recording functions to their corresponding classical computations options would be good for clarity.

Minimum capability additions to the base profile an Adaptive Profile supporting back-end must be able to support:

4. Conditional branching (the profile must support the `br` instruction assuming that the instruction only expresses non-loop control flow). Since support for the `br`
instruction relies on the `i1` type a small amount of instructions implementing classical logic on `i1` types is also assumed.
5. Mid-circuit measurement (`quantum__qis__mz__body` or some other measurement function must be supported in the quantum instruction set).
6. Conditional quantum operations in the instruction set that appear in the target basic blocks of a `br` instruction must be performed conditionally
   as with a classical LLVM program.
7. An `rt` function to turn a measurement result into a boolean (`__quantum__rt__read_result__body`) must be in the instruction set.

Beyond this, a back-end can opt into one or more of the following additional capabilities to extend minimal
Adaptive Profile compliance with additional features. A maximal Adaptive Profile program adds
all of the following capabilities. The extended possible Adaptive Profile capabilities a program can express are:

> 8.  Qubit resetting (`__quantum__qis__reset__body` supported in the instruction set).

Author: I think one could still have branching features and conditional gates based on say random number generation if a back-end has support for extern function call outs.

9.  Classical computations on integers.
10. Classical computations on floating point values.
11. Classical computations on fixed point values.

> 12.  User defined functions and function calls.

Reviewer 2: Renamed terminology to call them IR defined functions instead to help avoid confusion.

> 13.  Non-constant floating point arguments to instruction set functions.

Reviewer 2: We've added a separate module flag for fixed point as a data type, along with the list of llvm functions associated with that type that can be used/need to be supported.

The second requirement relieves a restriction from the base profile that qubits
can only be measured at the end of the program and that no quantum operations
can be performed on a measured qubit. 
The only requirement here is that all qubits must be measurable, but
there are no restrictions on when these measurements are made, and there is
no restriction necessitating that all qubits be measured. I.E. it's perfectly
valid to measure a subset of qubits used in the program, not have all measured
qubits in the output, and perform the measurements at different points.

**Bullet 3: Program output** <br />

There is no change to output specifications with respect to the base profile.

The specification of QIR and all its profiles needs to permit to accurately
reflect the program intent. This includes being able to define and customize the
program output. The Base Profile specification hence requires explicitly
expressing which values/measurements are returned by the program and in which
order. How to express this is defined in the section on [output
recording](#output-recording).

While it is sufficient for the QPU to do a final measurement of all qubits in a

> predefined order at the end of the program, only the selected subset will be

Author: I think this entire sentence should be removed since measurements can be conditional in the profile.

reflected in the produced output schema. A suitable output schema can be 

> generated in a post-processing step after the computation on the quantum

Author: Seems like a discussion topic for both this and the base profile spec.

> generated in a post-processing step after the computation on the quantum

Reviewer 2: We can rephrase this both here and in the Base Profile to say something along the lines of "independently of the quantum execution" rather than after.

processor itself has completed; customization of the program output hence does
not require support on the QPU itself.

The defined [output schemas](../output_schemas/) provide different options for
how a backend may express the computed value(s). The exact schema can be freely
chosen by the backend and is identified by a string label in the produced
schema. Each output schema contains sufficient information to allow quantum
programming frameworks to generate a user-friendly presentation of the returned
values in the requested order, such as, e.g., a histogram of all results when
running the program multiple times.

**Bullet 4: Conditional Forward branching** <br />
The Adaptive Profile can allow for arbitrary forward branching with the restriction being that

> branch instructions cannot express programs that do not terminate. By default, support for

Author: Since profile compliant QIR programs are supposed to define a single shot of a quantum program, then by default, I'd want Adaptive Profile programs to 1. terminate and 2. always have a value to indicate whether a shot successfully finished in the case that user programs can have real-time errors. I haven't really heard a use case for allowing non-termination in a quantum shot. Outside of the view of a shot, non-termination becomes useful in an IR but I'm not sold on it being useful within a shot. Repeat until success circuits may have non-deterministic length but you expect the success condition to be achieved eventually.

 If a back-end opts into  backwards branching support, or arbitrary function calls, then I'd say it's up to a back-end to provide real-time support for guaranteeing user program termination whether by a watchdog process or some other means since as mentioned it's not statically enforceable by any tooling.

> branch instructions cannot express programs that do not terminate. By default, support for

Author: "One thing that isn't clear from reading, and it seems this context also switches depending upon topic, is whether the spec views QIR to be run almost-directly on a QPU, or whether it's executed by a runtime which provides classical support and that calls to a QPU."

In our case the distinction between those two things is small or non-existent unless  'run almost-directly on a QPU' here explicitly means classical code or branching are controlled by an FPGA or more integrated hardware.

I think a lot of the core of the issue from my perspective comes down to whether QIR is intended to cover both the case of a classical co processor driving the creation of quantum kernels and also expressing classical logic to be used within the kernel or whether it _only_ is supposed to specify a quantum kernel/shot and the classical processing within it. I believe I've heard the latter from @bettinaheim and @swernli but I don't remember that being explicitly stated in the base profile spec.

> branch instructions cannot express programs that do not terminate. By default, support for

Reviewer 6: In my eyes the two are pretty distinct even at this level:

Bare-metal QPU control: gates or instructions which can be lowered directly into the FPGAs or run on the QPU.
Runtime: arbitrarily complicated classical/quantum code which contains contextual information as well as pre/post-processing done purely classically, likely on a machine that is close-but-not-actually the QPU.

Even at a very basic level you can represent programs that may not have full compatability on a QPU but can be transformed or run in a way that they are - but they need additional runtime support to do so.

QIR itself is already able to represent arbitrarily complicated code since it's just LLVM IR. I've always considered profiles as just putting limitations in place so people can build up simple systems first, evolving towards the far more interesting application: embedding a ton of classical processing/context in the QIR that may be used by any runtime to aggresively optimize whatever algorithm and circuit is being run.

Nothing against the incremental approach and in fact I'm for it. But it's also useful to make sure the foundations don't hobble far more complex use-cases.

with a timeout that will kill an executing Adaptive Profile program if it takes
too much time). The following forms of branch instructions can be supported in the 
profile, but at least the basic `br` instruction must be supported from the list below :
| LLVM Instruction         | Context and Purpose                                                                              | Rules for Usage                                                                                             |
| :----------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `br i1 label %true_branch, label %false_branch`                   | Branch to one of two target blocks. | Cannot be used to implement a non-terminating loop.     |
| `switch i64 %reg, label %otherwise [i64 0, %zero_branch i64 1, %one_branch ... i64 n, %n_branch]`                     | Used to branch to one of many objects based on an integer key.                            | Cannot be used to implement a non-terminating loop. |

> | `select i1 %0, i64 %true_reg, i64 %false_reg`                    | conditionally select the value in a register. | Cannot be used to implement a non-terminating loop.                            |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `select i1 %0, i64 %true_reg, i64 %false_reg`                    |   |
```

> 

Reviewer 7: It seems like support for the `switch` and `select` instructions is optional, but since they are not part of the optional Bullets of the Adaptive Profile (i.e. Bullets 8-15), there is no way to specify them in the module flags like the other optional features/instructions of the adaptive profile. It might be more clear to specify that support for all 3 is required, or else place support for the optional `switch` and `select` instructions into a new module flag.

Author: Hmm this is a good point. Currently, Quantinuum supports `select` and `br` but not `switch`, however I think `switch` support could be very useful for reasoning about control flow independence and doing better static analysis for back-end optimization.  I don't see why a back-end supporting `br` couldn't support the other two so it may still make sense to have all of these be mandatory instructions to implement. 

But like splitting classical compute support into different buckets with their own module flags, I think it's probably a good idea for `br` to be the mainline support instruction and for `select` and `switch` to be optional instructions to support.

Reviewer: From a validation perspective, it would be easier if support for `select` and `switch` were optional under their own distinct option. That way, validation tools can check against the corresponding module attribute.

Reviewer 8: Of note, while the `switch` instruction is certainly optional in LLVM (and there even exists a transformation pass, [lowerswitch](https://www.llvm.org/docs/Passes.html#lowerswitch-lower-switchinsts-to-branches), that will turn the single switch instruction into the equivalent branching), the `select` instruction is much harder to eliminate. Either `select` needs to be supported or empty branches have to be allowed and lots of care taken with optimization passes that will aggressively turn those empty branches back into `select`. For example, consider this pseudo-code:
```
c = 0;
if (condition) {
    c = 1;
} else {
    c = 2;
}
```
Using just branching and phi-nodes, that would turn into something like:
```llvm
br i1 %condition, label %then-branch, label %else-branch

then-branch:
br label %fallthrough

else-branch:
br label %fallthrough

fallthrough:
%c = phi i64 [ 1, %then-branch ], [ 2, %else-branch ]
```
Both blocks used by the branch instruction are completely empty because the phi-node does all the work of choosing a value based on control flow. This is exactly what `select` is for, so any cfg simplification pass ends up turning this into:
```llvm
%c = select i1 %condition, i64 1, i64 2
```
This requires a custom pass to undo it, which would need to be run after any other optimizations to make sure they don't reintroduce the `select`.

Reviewer: Based on this, one course of action is the following:
- Make `br` the only required instruction for Bullet 4 (Conditional Forward Branching), and Bullet 15 (Backwards Branching).
- Since both the `phi` and `select` instructions are used in the context of manipulating integer, floating point and fixed-point calculations, the inclusion of these two instructions can be tied to the computation options (Bullets 9, 10 and 11).
- For simplicity, exclude the `switch` instruction from this version of the spec since it is not required for any of the bullet points to work, and it easy to replace. There is an out-of-the-box [transformation pass](https://www.llvm.org/docs/Passes.html#lowerswitch-lower-switchinsts-to-branches) that rewrites switch instructions with a sequence of branches.

Author: I really like that course of action Cesar--maybe with the caveat that the `switch` instruction still becoming an optional feature. From my perspective long term, I eventually want adaptive profile programs to support switch instructions because it helps make it more easily recognizable. I'll update based on these points.

Reviewer 8: @cesarzc and I spoke a bit about this, and I think we missed something on this one. The need for `phi` and `select` is not specific to integers, floating point and fixed point. Because the required elements allow for dynamic Boolean values, and those values can be combined or branched upon by complex logic, it may still be necessary to use a `phi` or `select` to decide between two different values of a dynamic Boolean for later branching. I think that means `phi` and `select` need to be part of the required instruction support list.

The `br` instruction represents a usual if-then-else style jump dependent on 
a boolean, whereas the `switch` instruction is similar to a switch statement in a high
level language, and finally the `select` instruction conditionally evaluates to a register's
value depending on the boolean input. A hardware provider can opt into supporting
some subset of the above instructions (for example br and select but not switch, etc.).
Other branch terminators that involve indirect jumps, function calls, or exception
handling are not supported in Adaptive Profile programs. To keep branching from

> being unnecessarily

Reviewer 7: This looks like a sentence fragment.

the same qubit for computations, limiting the amount of qubits required
for redundant calculations and also allowing for circuit width to bet reduced in favor of increasing depth:

```llvm
call quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null) 
call quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* null) ; 1st coin flip
call quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* null)
call quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit* null) 
call quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit* null, %Result* null) ; 2nd coin flip
call quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* null)
```

**Bullet 9: Classical integer computations** <br />
An Adaptive Profile program may include expressions for numeric and logical computations
that don't involve allocating memory for aggregate data structures. These
can include integer arithmetic calcuations of a back-end specified width, floating
point arithmetic calculations of a back-end specified width, or logical operations
on integers of a back-end specified width. Front-ends can use any integer width when generating code,
and it is the responsiblity of a back-end to provide a compile-time error message if the front-end

> uses an integer width greater than that which the support.

Reviewer 5: two concerns:
* an end-user would be working with a "high level" data type which is likely to imply high width (so how would they know), and
* therefore some mechanism for lowering the width would need to happen somewhere (breaking this guidance)

Personally, I wouldn't be excited about having to deal with explicit typing (e.g., numpy's `dtype`) either as an end-user or working on a backend. On the other hand, rigor is good too...

Reviewer 2: We intend to update the spec to have the module flag explicitly specifying the used data type size(s). The backend should then look at these flags and reject the program if it does not provide support for these sizes.

  tail call void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit* nonnull inttoptr (i64 5 to %Qubit*))
  call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 4 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([5 x i8], [5 x i8]* @0, i32 0, i32 0))
  call void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result* nonnull inttoptr (i64 5 to %Result*), i8* getelementptr inbounds ([5 x i8], [5 x i8]* @1, i32 0, i32 0))
  ret void
}

declare void @__quantum__qis__cnot__body(%Qubit*, %Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__h__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__x__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__z__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__qis__reset__body(%Qubit*) local_unnamed_addr

declare void @__quantum__rt__result_record_output(%Result*, i8*)

declare void @__quantum__qis__mz__body(%Qubit*, %Result*)

declare i1 @__quantum__qis__read_result__body(%Result*)

; attributes

attributes #0 = { "entry_point" "qir_profiles"="adaptive_profile" "output_labeling_schema"="schema_id" "required_num_qubits"="6" "required_num_results"="6" }

; module flags

> !llvm.module.flags = !{!0, !1, !2, !3}

Reviewer 7: Should this line be updated to include `!4` through `!11`?

generate and use debug symbols.

## Entry Point Definition

The bitcode contains the definition of the LLVM function that should be invoked
when the program is executed, referred to as "entry point" in the rest of this
profile specification. The name of this function may be chosen freely, as long
as it is a valid [global
identifier](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#identifiers) according to the
LLVM standard. The entry point is identified by a custom function attribute; the
section on [attributes](#attributes) defines which attributes must be attached
to the entry point function.

An entry point function may not take any parameters and must either return void in case the program has no failure conditions or must return an exit code in the
form of a 64-bit integer. The exit code `0` must be used to indicate a
successful execution of the program. Exit code `1` can be used to illustrate
that a real-time error occurred in the execution of the program dependent
upon what features a back-end opts into when supporting an Adaptive Profile program.
For example, with **Bullet 9/14** classical code may encounter errors like division

> by zero that can cause an entry-point function to fail. In this case, programs must dynamically check failure conditions and return the exit code instead of failing outright.

Author: I think this point bears more discussion. The entry-point function is intended to have different return values for indicating shot success, and it would be nice if a shot always has an associated return value to indicate whether a shot finished successfully or failed due to the user program expressing a real-time classical logic failure. I do think that as the profiles become more expressive this should be less constrained.

> by zero that can cause an entry-point function to fail. In this case, programs must dynamically check failure conditions and return the exit code instead of failing outright.

Author: I do think I can be talked off the Adaptive Profile programs must have checked divisions point, however, if that's a broadly shared sentiment. Admittedly, putting that constraint on an IR seems aggressive.

> by zero that can cause an entry-point function to fail. In this case, programs must dynamically check failure conditions and return the exit code instead of failing outright.

Reviewer 6: It's less about the divide-by-zero, it's just a bit more foundational than that. Say you have some C# code that calls Q# which got compiled into QIR and sent to be run on a remote QPU. The 'result' of that entry point when it's run is your results dictionary built up via the various intrisics, _not_ the error code. Even if your execution failed, you wouldn't just get back an error code, you'd get an actual exception in your language of choice. In both cases the IR itself is not representative of what is actually being done. 

It also breaks down when you have the concept of far more complex code which actually does serious post-processing in the QIR itself and returns the results of that, which will be a clasical value. In that situation you simply can't have this, because the return from the entry-point method is, well, the actual return value. (Adding infinite `record_x` intrinsics is not a nice solution.)

Just switch the solutions. Leave the flow in the IR as you'd expect and just have an intrinsic that's `qis_rt_return_code(code)` or something if you want to be able to throw specific errors with codes.

> by zero that can cause an entry-point function to fail. In this case, programs must dynamically check failure conditions and return the exit code instead of failing outright.

Reviewer 2: I think this boils down to whether we require a single return or not. We think at its core, this should not be required, and will make support for multiple returns an optional feature. We will still require the return code to be conveyed as an actual return statement; reasonably, anything that requires giving a non-zero return code also requires to have support for one or more classical data types, making it possible to propagate the code to the final return.

| `call`                   | Used within a basic block to invoke any one of the declared QIS functions and run-time functions. | May optionally be preceded by a [`tail` marker](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#call-instruction).       |
| `br`                     | Used to branch from one block to another in the entry point function.                            | The branching must be unconditional and occurs as the final instruction of a block to jump to the next one. |
| `ret`                    | Used to return the exit code of the program.                                                     | Must occur (only) as the last instruction of the final block in the entry point.                            |
| `inttoptr`               | Used to cast an `i64` integer value to either a `%Qubit*` or a `%Result*`.                       | May be used as part of a function call only.                                                                |
| `getelementptr inbounds` | Used to create an `i8*` to pass a constant string for the purpose of labeling an output value.   | May be used as part of a call to an output recording function only.                                         |

> 

Author: Ah this should have said 'base profile' before the table. Then the comments after are supposed to indicate how various bullet points add more instructions on top of the base profile.

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's just link to the base profile instead and remove the duplication here.

use of dynamic qubit or result management. The value of both module flags hence
must be set to `false`.

For `i1`, `i64`, `f64`, ... values created by mid-circuit measurement, extern functions, or classical computations the assumption is that while a `%Result*`
may point to a valid memory location in RAM or some other memory pool, by default, instructions performed on virtual registers with these data types corresponds to these values being stored
in integer or floating registers when an instruction is executed. Before a virtual register is used in an instruction, there is no assumption that the value in the virtual register
always corresponds to a physical register. For example, when considering
register coloring, the virtual register, `%0`, in the QIR program may refer to a value stored in RAM for most of its lifetime before being loaded into a register when an instruction operates
on `%0`.
If this is not the case, then a back-end providing support for these instructions should indicate how/where these classical
values are stored and what kind of constraints are placed on computations (for example, if the integer is stored directly on an FPGA and an add instruction is performed

> on an FPGA then a back-end should specify this).

Author: I agree with this sentiment! All that matters is that the computation is performed and stored. Still, I do believe that somewhere providers should document caveats on support. I will be adding a page for hardware providers to indicate how they support the profile and its optional features.

### Error Messages
There are two forms of error messages that can occur as a result of submission of adaptive profile programs to a back-end:

1. Compile-time error messages.
2. Run-Time error messages.

The compile-time error messages can occur when a back-end doesn't support some of the optional features from **Bullets 8-15**. In this case, the back-end should flag which features in the module 
flags that were enabled that it does not support. Additionally, if there specific limitations on the support of certain features, like not supporting a particular instruction in
**Bullet 9**, then the back-end should return an error message indicating the type of instruction that was not supported.

The run-time error messages can occur when opting into features such as the classical computations in **Bullets 9-11**. In there, if division or remainder instructions are supported, then a division by 0 error
can occur. In the case that a shot executing the program encounters such a real-time error, then an error code should be reported for the shot in the QIR output format section for the 
given shot.
### LLVM 15 Opaque Pointers

> The transition to LLVM 15 means that the `%Result*` and `%Qubit*` representations of qubits and measurement results will no longer be valid.

Author: Ah the issue of LLVM 15 pointer representation should be orthogonal to the adaptive profile work stream. I will add some writing to clarify this. If a minimum LLVM version isn't mandated by the QIR spec, then eventually the different profiles should be updated to clarify how profile programs change across the LLVM 15 divide.

}
```

The only restriction on user functions and definitions is that you cannot have dynamically allocated `%Qubit*`  arguments, they must still be constant `%Qubit*` id's. An adaptive profile program using this feature must

> have the a module flag set like the following: `!{i32 1, !"user_functions", i1 true}`.

Reviewer 9: Would this conflict with QAT's [QubitRemapPass](https://github.com/qir-alliance/qat/blob/main/qir/qat/Passes/StaticResourceComponent/QubitRemapPass.cpp)?

> have the a module flag set like the following: `!{i32 1, !"user_functions", i1 true}`.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, this is invalid. Once all QAT transformations are done, the IR should again be spec compliant, but it is not necessarily spec compliant after every pass on its own.
